---
categories:
- 时空波动
date: '2014-02-04 10:13:20'
description: ''
tags:
- 读书
title: 浏览了一遍Wolfram《一种新科学》
---
带着对Mathematica的喜爱与崇敬，快缩浏览了一遍Mathematica创始人Wolfram的《一种新科学》（The new kind of Science）. 结果发现这本书太罗嗦，没什么实际内容，很无聊，简直像是中国领导的讲话。不过搜了搜书评倒是发现很好玩。原来大家都在拿Wolfram开玩笑。比如这个： With the publication of his new all\-encompassing book, "A New Kind of Science", mathematics guru Stephen Wolfram has revealed a new scientific theory that unifies the fields of mathematics, physics, biology, chemistry, and mini\-golf. " 再比如这个：



**A New Kind of Review** 

by "a reader"



I can only imagine how fortunate you must feel to be reading my review. This review is the product of my lifetime of experience in meeting important people and thinking deep thoughts. This is a new kind of review, and will no doubt influence the way you think about the world around you and the way you think of yourself.



Bigger than infinity Although my review deserves thousands of pages to articulate, I am limiting many of my deeper thoughts to only single characters. I encourage readers of my review to dedicate the many years required to fully absorb the significance of what I am writing here. Fortunately, we live in exactly the time when my review can be widely disseminated by "internet" 

technology and stored on "digital media", allowing current and future scholars to delve more deeply into my original and insightful use of commas, numbers, and letters.



My place in history My review allows, for the first time, a complete and total understanding not only of this but *every single* book ever written. I call this "the principle of book equivalence." Future generations will decide the relative merits of this review compared with, for example, the works of Shakespeare. This effort will open new realms of scholarship.



More about me I first began writing reviews as a small child, where my talent was clearly apparent to those around me, including my mother. She preserved my early writings which, although simpler in structure, portend elements of my current style. I include one of them below (which I call review 30\) to indicate the scholarly pedigree of the document now in your hands or on your screen or committed to your memory:



"The guy who wrote the book is also the publisher of the book. I guess he's the only person smart enough to understand what's in it. When I'm older I too will use a vanity press. Then I can write all the pages I want."...



It is staggering to contemplate that all the great works of literature can be derived from the letters I use in writing this review. I am pleased to have shared them with you, and hereby grant you the liberty to use up to twenty (20\) of them consecutively without attribution. Any use of additional characters in print must acknowledge this review as source material since it contains, implicitly or explicitly, all future written documents.



另外亚马逊上有个很严肃的书评很有信息含量：



**The Emperor's New Kind of Clothes** 

February 28, 2003

By Joe Weiss

Format:Hardcover

This review took almost one year. Unlike many previous referees (rank them by Amazon.com's "most helpful" feature) I read all 1197 pages including notes. Just to make sure I won't miss the odd novel insight hidden among a million trivial platitudes.

On page 27 Wolfram explains "probably the single most surprising discovery I have ever made:" a simple program can produce output that seems irregular and complex.



This has been known for six decades. Every computer science (CS) student knows the dovetailer, a very simple 2 line program that systematically lists and executes all possible programs for a universal computersuch as a Turing machine (TM). It computes all computable patterns, including all those in Wolfram's book, embodies the well\-known limits of computability, and is basis of uncountable CS exercises.



Wolfram does know (page 1119\) Minsky's very simple universal TMs from the 1960s. Using extensive simulations, he finds a slightly simpler one. New science? Small addition to old science. On page 675 we find a particularly simple cellular automaton (CA) and Matthew Cook's universality proof(?). This might be the most interesting chapter. It reflects that today's PCs are more powerful systematic searchers for simple rules than those of 40 years ago. No new paradigm though.



Was Wolfram at least first to view programs as potential explanations of everything? Nope. That was Zuse. Wolfram mentions him in exactly one line (page 1026\): "Konrad Zuse suggested that \[the universe] could be a continuous CA." This is totally misleading. Zuse's 1967 paper suggested the universe is DISCRETELY computable, possibly on a DISCRETE CA just like Wolfram's. Wolfram's causal networks (CA's with variable toplogy, chapter 9\) will run on any universal CA a la Ulam \& von Neumann \& Conway \& Zuse.

Chapter 9 (2nd law of thermodynamics) elaborates (without reference)on Zuse's old insight that entropy cannot really increase in deterministically computed systems, although it often SEEMS to increase. Wolfram extends Zuse's work by a tiny margin, using today's more powerful computers to perform experiments as suggested in Zuse's 1969 book. I find it embarassing how Wolfram tries to suggest it was him who shifted a paradigm, not the legendary Zuse.



Some reviews cite Wolfram's previous reputation as a physicist and software entrepreneur, giving him the benefit of the doubt instead of immediately dismissing him as just another plagiator. Zuse's reputation is in a different league though: He built world's very first general purpose computers (1935\-1941\), while Wolfram is just one of many creators of useful software (Mathematica). Remarkably, in his history of computing (page 1107\) Wolfram appears to try to diminuish Zuse's contributions by only mentioning Aiken's later 1944 machine.



On page 465 ff (and 505 ff on multiway systems) Wolfram asks whether there is a simple program that computes the universe. Here he sounds like Schmidhuber in his 1997 paper "A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything." Schmidhuber applied the above\-mentioned simple dovetailer to all computable universes. His widely known writings come out on top when you google for "computable universes" etc, so Wolfram must have known them too, for he read an "immense number of articles books and web sites" (page xii) and executed "more than a hundred thousand mouse miles" (page xiv). He endorses Schmidhuber's "no\-CA\-but\-TM approach" (page 486, no reference) but not his suggestion of using Levin's asymptotically optimal program searcher (1973\) to find our universe's code.



On page 469 we are told that the simplest program for the data is the most probable one. No mention of the very science based on this ancient principle: Solomonoff's inductive inference theory (1960\-1978\); recent optimality results by Merhav \& Feder \& Hutter. Following Schmidhuber's "algorithmic theories of everything" (2000\), short world\-explaining programs are necessarily more likely, provided the world is sampled from a limit\-computable prior distribution. Compare Li \& Vitanyi's excellent 1997 textbook on Kolmogorov complexity.



On page 628 ff we find a lot of words on human thinking and short programs. As if this was novel! Wolfram seems totally unaware of Hutter's optimal universal rational agents (2001\) based on simple programs a la Solomonoff \& Kolmogorov \& Levin \& Chaitin. Wolfram suggests his simple programs will contribute to fine arts (page 11\), neither mentioning existing, widely used, very short, fractal\-based programs for computing realistic images of mountains and plants, nor the only existing art form explicitly based on simple programs: Schmidhuber's low\-complexity art.



Wolfram talks a lot about reversible CAs but little about Edward Fredkin \& Tom Toffoli who pioneered this field. He ignores Wheeler's "it from bit," Tegmark \& Greenspan \& Petrov \& Marchal's papers, Moravec \& Kurzweil's somewhat related books, and Greg Egan's fun SF on CA\-based universes (Permutation City, 1995\).



When the book came out some non\-expert journalists hyped it without knowing its contents. Then cognoscenti had a look at it and recognized it as a rehash of old ideas, plus pretty pictures. And the reviews got worse and worse. As far as I can judge, positive reviews were written only by people without basic CS education and little knowledge of CS history. Some biologists and even a few physicists initially were impressed because to them it really seemed new. Maybe Wolfram's switch from physics to CS explains why he believes his thoughts are radical, not just reinventions of the wheel.

